Migrate Using Airflow to execute SQL (#1113)
astronomer/docs: guides/airflow-sql.md

---
title: "Using Airflow to Execute SQL"
description: "Execute queries, parameterize queries, and embed SQL-driven ETL in Apache Airflow DAGs."
id: airflow-sql
sidebar_label: "Execute SQL queries"
---

Executing SQL queries is one of the most common use cases for data pipelines. Whether you're extracting and loading data, calling a stored procedure, or executing a complex query for a report, Airflow has you covered. Using Airflow, you can orchestrate all of your SQL tasks elegantly with just a few lines of boilerplate code.

> In this guide, we'll cover general best practices for executing SQL from your DAG, showcase Airflow's available SQL-related operators, and demonstrate how to use Airflow for a few common SQL use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide you'll learn about the best practices for executing SQL from your DAG,  review the  most commonly used Airflow SQL-related operators, and then use sample code to implement a few common SQL use cases.
```

:::info

> All code in this guide can be found on the [Astronomer GitHub](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-sql-tutorial).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All code used in this tutorial is located in the [Astronomer Registry](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-sql-tutorial).
```

Author: I don't think this link is on the registry yet - updating comment

:::

## Best practices for executing SQL from your DAG

> No matter which database and flavor of SQL you're using, there are many ways to execute  your queries using Airflow. Once you determine how to execute your queries, the following tips will help you keep your DAGs clean, readable, and efficient for execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter what database or SQL version you're using, there are many ways to execute your queries using Airflow. Once you determine how to execute your queries, the following tips will help you keep your DAGs clean, readable, and efficient for execution.
```

### Use hooks and operators

> Using hooks and operators whenever possible makes your DAGs easier to read, easier to maintain, and more performant. Airflow has many SQL-related operators available that can significantly limit the code needed to execute your queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using hooks and operators whenever possible makes your DAGs easier to read, easier to maintain, and improves performance. The SQL-related operators included with Airflow can significantly limit the code needed to execute your queries.
```

### Keep lengthy SQL code out of your DAG

Astronomer recommends avoiding top-level code in your DAG file. If you have a SQL query, you should keep it in its own .sql file and imported into your DAG.

If you use the Astro CLI, you can store scripts like SQL queries in the `include/` directory:

```bash
├─ dags/  
|    ├─ example-dag.py  
├─ plugins/  
├─ include/  
|    ├─ query1.sql  
|    ├─ query2.sql    
├─ Dockerfile  
├─ packages.txt  
└─ requirements.txt
```

An exception to this rule could be very short queries (such as `SELECT * FROM table`). Putting one-line queries like this directly in the DAG is fine if it makes your code more readable.

### Keep transformations in SQL

Remember that Airflow is primarily an orchestrator, not a transformation framework. While you have the full power of Python in your DAG, Astronomer recommends offloading as much of your transformation logic as possible to third party transformation frameworks. With SQL, this means completing the transformations within your query whenever possible.

## SQL operators

> Airflow has many operators available out of the box that make working with SQL easier. This guide lists some of the most commonly used ones that you should be aware of, but note that this list isn't comprehensive. For more documentation about Airflow operators, head [here](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/stable/_api/airflow/operators/index.html#).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make working with SQL easier, Airflow includes many built in operators. This tutorial discusses some of the most commonly used operators and shouldn't be considered a definitive resource. For more information about the available Airflow operators, see [airflow.operators](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/stable/_api/airflow/operators/index.html#).
```

- [SnowflakeOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/snowflake/modules/snowflakeoperator)
- [BigQueryOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/google/modules/bigqueryexecutequeryoperator)

### Transfer operators

Transfer operators move data from a source to a destination. For SQL-related tasks, they can often be used in the 'Extract-Load' portion of an ELT pipeline and can significantly reduce the amount of code you need to write. Some examples are:

- [S3ToSnowflakeTransferOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/snowflake/modules/s3tosnowflakeoperator)
- [S3toRedshiftOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/amazon/modules/s3toredshiftoperator)
- [GCSToBigQueryOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/google/modules/gcstobigqueryoperator)
- [PostgresToGCSOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/google/modules/postgrestogcsoperator)
- [BaseSQLToGCSOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/google/modules/basesqltogcsoperator)
- [VerticaToMySqlOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/mysql/modules/verticatomysqloperator)

## Examples

> With those basic concepts in mind, we'll show a few examples of common SQL use cases. For this tutorial you'll use [Snowflake](https://www.snowflake.com/), but note that the concepts shown can be adapted for other databases. Some of the environment setup for each example makes use of the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview) and Astro project structure, but you can also adapt this setup for use with Apache Airflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've learned about the most commonly used Airflow SQL operators, you'll use the operators in some SQL use cases. For this tutorial you'll use [Snowflake](https://www.snowflake.com/), but the concepts shown can be adapted for other databases. Some of the environment setup for each example makes use of the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview) and Astro project structure, but you can also adapt this setup for use with Apache Airflow.
```

> ### Example 1: Executing a query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example 1: Execute a query
```

         )

         opr_call_sproc1 >> opr_call_sproc2
```

The `template_searchpath` argument in the DAG definition tells the DAG to look in the given folder for scripts, so you can now add two SQL scripts to your project. In this example, those scripts are `call-sproc1.sql` and c`all-sproc2.sql`, which contain the following SQL code respectively:

```sql
-- call-sproc1
CALL sp_pi();
```

```sql
-- call-sproc2
CALL sp_pi_squared();
```

`sp_pi()` and `sp_pi_squared()` are two stored procedures that are defined in a Snowflake instance. Note that the SQL in these files could be any type of query you need to execute. Sprocs are used here only as an example.

Finally, you need to set up a connection to Snowflake. There are a few ways to manage connections using Astronomer, including [IAM roles](https://docs.astronomer.io/software/integrate-iam), [secrets managers](https://docs.astronomer.io/software/secrets-backend), and the [Airflow API](https://docs.astronomer.io/software/airflow-api). For this example, set up a connection using the Airflow UI. Because the connection in the DAG is called `snowflake`, your configured connection should look something like this:

> ![Configured Snowflake connection in the Airflow UI](img/guides/snowflake_connection.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![Configured Snowflake connection in the Airflow UI](/img/guides/snowflake_connection.png)
```

With the connection established, you can now run the DAG to execute the SQL queries.

> ### Example 2: Executing a query with parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example 2: Execute a query with parameters
```

Using Airflow, you can also parameterize your SQL queries to make them more dynamic. Consider when you have a query that selects data from a table for a date that you want to dynamically update. You can execute the query using the same setup as in Example 1, but with a few adjustments.

Your DAG will look like the following:

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.contrib.operators.snowflake_operator import SnowflakeOperator
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=1)
}

with DAG('parameterized_query',
         start_date=datetime(2020, 6, 1),
         max_active_runs=3,
         schedule_interval='@daily',
         default_args=default_args,
         template_searchpath='/usr/local/airflow/include',
         catchup=False
         ) as dag:

         opr_param_query = SnowflakeOperator(
             task_id='param_query',
             snowflake_conn_id='snowflake',
             sql='param-query.sql'
         )
```

> The DAG is essentially the same as in Example 1. The difference is in the query itself:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DAG is essentially the same that you used in Example 1. The difference is in the query itself:
```

```sql
SELECT *
FROM STATE_DATA
WHERE date = {{ yesterday_ds_nodash }}f
```

In this example, the query has been parameterized to dynamically select data for yesterday's date using a built-in Airflow variable with double curly brackets. The rendered template in the Airflow UI looks like this:

> ![Rendered Template](img/guides/rendered_template.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![Rendered Template](/img/guides/rendered_template.png)
```

> Astronomer recommends using Airflow variables or macros whenever possible to increase flexibility and make your workflows [idempotent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence). The above example will work with any Airflow variables. For example, you could access a variable from your Airflow config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astronomer recommends using Airflow variables or macros whenever possible to increase flexibility and make your workflows [idempotent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence). The above example will work with any Airflow variables. For example, you could access a variable from your Airflow config:
```

" increase flexibility"?

```sql
SELECT *
FROM STATE_DATA
WHERE state = {{ conf['state_variable'] }}
```

> If you need a parameter that is not available as a built-in variable/macro, such as a value from another task in your DAG, you can also pass that parameter into your query using the operator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need a parameter that is not available as a built-in variable or a macro, such as a value from another task in your DAG, you can also pass that parameter into your query using the operator:
```

```python
opr_param_query = SnowflakeOperator(
             task_id='param_query',
             snowflake_conn_id='snowflake',
             sql='param-query.sql',
			 params={"date":mydatevariable}
         )
```

And then reference that param in your SQL file:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM STATE_DATA
WHERE date = {{ params.date }}
```

> ### Example 3: Loading data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example 3: Load data
```

The next example loads data from an external source into a table in a database. You'll grab data from an API and save it to a flat file on S3, which you can then load into Snowflake.

This example uses the [S3toSnowflakeTransferOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/snowflake/modules/s3tosnowflakeoperator) to limit the code that you have to write.

> First, create a DAG that pulls COVID data from an [API endpoint](https://covidtracking.com/data/api) for California, Colorado, Washington, and Oregon, saves the data to comma-separated values (CSVs) on S3, and loads each of those CSVs to Snowflake using the transfer operator. Here's the DAG code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a DAG that pulls COVID data from an [API endpoint](https://covidtracking.com/data/api) for California, Colorado, Washington, and Oregon, saves the data to comma-separated values (CSVs) on Amazon S3, and loads each of those CSVs to Snowflake using the transfer operator. Here's the DAG code:
```

default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=5)
}

endpoints = ['ca', 'co', 'wa', 'or']

date = '{{ yesterday_ds_nodash }}'

with DAG('covid_data_s3_to_snowflake',
         start_date=datetime(2020, 6, 1),
         max_active_runs=3,
         schedule_interval='@daily',
         default_args=default_args,
         catchup=False
         ) as dag:

    t0 = DummyOperator(task_id='start')   

    for endpoint in endpoints:
        generate_files = PythonOperator(
            task_id='generate_file_{0}'.format(endpoint),
            python_callable=upload_to_s3,
            op_kwargs={'endpoint': endpoint, 'date': date}
        )

        snowflake = S3ToSnowflakeTransferOperator(
            task_id='upload_{0}_snowflake'.format(endpoint),
            s3_keys=['{0}_{1}.csv'.format(endpoint, date)],
            stage='covid_stage',
            table='STATE_DATA',
            schema='SANDBOX_KENTEND',
            file_format='covid_csv',
            snowflake_conn_id='snowflake'
        )

        t0 >> generate_files >> snowflake
```

> Here's a graph view of the DAG:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This image shows a graph view of the DAG:
```

> ![Covid-to-Snowflake Graph](img/guides/covid_to_snowflake_graph_view.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![Covid-to-Snowflake Graph](/img/guides/covid_to_snowflake_graph_view.png)
```

There are a few things you need to configure in Snowflake to make this DAG work:

- A table that will receive the data (`STATE_DATA` in this example).
- A defined Snowflake stage (`covid_stage`) and file format (`covid_csv`). See the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/data-load-s3.html).

Next, set up your Airflow connections. This example requires two connections:

- A connection to S3 (established using `astro-s3-workshop` in the DAG above).
- A connection to Snowflake (established using `snowflake`. See Example 1 for a screenshot of what the connection should look like).

After this setup, you're ready to run the DAG! After a successful run, you can see the new data for today's date in your table.

> ![Snowflake Data](img/guides/snowflake_data_populated.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![Snowflake Data](/img/guides/snowflake_data_populated.png)
```

Note that while this example is specific to Snowflake, the concepts apply to any database you might be using. If a transfer operator doesn't exist for your specific source and destination tools, you can always write your own (and maybe contribute it back to the Airflow project)!

> ## Example 4: Using pandas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example 4: Use pandas
```

> While Astronomer recommends using SQL-related operators and keeping any data transformations in SQL, for some use cases this doesn't work. For instance, pivoting data into a new format for a report can be difficult to complete with SQL alone. In this next example, you'll make use of Python libraries to integrate your SQL into a Python function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Astronomer recommends using SQL-related operators and keeping any data transformations in SQL, for some use cases this doesn't work. For instance, pivoting data into a new format for a report can be difficult to complete with SQL alone. In this next example, you'll make use of Python libraries to integrate your SQL operator into a Python function.
```

    #Save dataframe to S3
    s3_hook = S3Hook(aws_conn_id=S3_CONN_ID)
    s3_hook.load_string(pivot_df.to_csv(index=False),
                        '{0}.csv'.format(filename),
                        bucket_name=BUCKET,
                        replace=True)

default_args = {
    'owner': 'airflow',
    'depends_on_past': False,
    'email_on_failure': False,
    'email_on_retry': False,
    'retries': 1,
    'retry_delay': timedelta(minutes=1)
}

with DAG('pandas_processing',
         start_date=datetime(2020, 6, 1),
         max_active_runs=1,
         schedule_interval='@daily',
         default_args=default_args,
         catchup=False
         ) as dag:

        opr_pivot_data = PythonOperator(
            task_id='pivot_data',
            python_callable=pivot_data
        )

        opr_load_data = S3ToSnowflakeTransferOperator(
            task_id='load_data',
            s3_keys=['{0}.csv'.format(filename)],
            stage='covid_stage',
            table='PIVOT_STATE_DATA',
            schema='SANDBOX_KENTEND',
            file_format='covid_csv',
            snowflake_conn_id='snowflake'
        )

        opr_pivot_data >> opr_load_data
```

> In the DAG, the Python function `pivot_data` executes the SQL query and saves the results in a pandas dataframe using the `read_sql` function. It then pivots the data to the desired format and saves the it to S3. Lastly, the downstream task `opr_load_data`  loads that data back to Snowflake using the transfer operator described in Example 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the DAG, the Python function `pivot_data` executes the SQL query and saves the results in a pandas dataframe using the `read_sql` function. It then pivots the data to the desired format and saves it to Amazon S3. Lastly, the downstream task `opr_load_data`  loads that data back to Snowflake using the transfer operator described in Example 3.
```

> ## Example 5 - Using dag-factory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example 5 - Use dag-factory
```

> If you have SQL users who aren't familiar with Airflow or don't know any Python, they can use [dag-factory](https://github.com/ajbosco/dag-factory) to generate DAGs using a YAML configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're unfamiliar with Airflow or Python, you can use [dag-factory](https://github.com/ajbosco/dag-factory) to generate DAGs using a YAML configuration file.
```

Once you've installed dag-factory in your Airflow environment, you can add your SQL query tasks to a YAML configuration file and add this to your project's `include/` directory:

```yaml
dag_factory_query:
  default_args:
    owner: 'example_owner'
    start_date: 2020-12-02
    retries: 1
    retry_delay_sec: 300
  schedule_interval: '0 3 * * *'
  concurrency: 1
  max_active_runs: 1
  dagrun_timeout_sec: 60
  default_view: 'tree'  # or 'graph', 'duration', 'gantt', 'landing_times'
  orientation: 'LR'  # or 'TB', 'RL', 'BT'
  tasks:
    task_1:
      operator: airflow.contrib.operators.snowflake_operator.SnowflakeOperator
      snowflake_conn_id: 'snowflake'
      sql: 'SELECT * FROM STATE_DATA'
```

Then, create a DAG file:

```python
from airflow import DAG
import dagfactory

dag_factory = dagfactory.DagFactory("/usr/local/airflow/include/config_file.yml")

dag_factory.clean_dags(globals())
dag_factory.generate_dags(globals())
```

Once you Deploy it, the DAG will show a single task the Airflow UI:

> ![DAG Factory Graph](img/guides/dag_factory_graph_view.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![DAG Factory Graph](/img/guides/dag_factory_graph_view.png)
```

## Next steps

> This guide covered how to interact with your SQL database from Airflow and important best practices when doing so. But there are still some outstanding questions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've learned how to interact with your SQL database from Airflow. But there are still some outstanding questions:
```
